[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. This is a series
on the foundations of mathematics where I attempt
to set up a somewhat new and better foundation
for the subject. It's a very ambitious program,
and we've just begun the subject. We've talked
about arithmetic and some sort of elementary
aspects of how to set that up. We've talked
about geometry and some elementary aspects
of how to set that up. Now it's time to
go to the third most important aspect of
the subject. Mathematics has three key
areas: arithmetic is the primary one;
it's the most important and historically the
oldest. Geometry is the second most important
and the second oldest, and the third most
important and the third oldest is algebra.
So today we're going to initiate our discussion
of algebra, and we're going to have quite a lot
to say about algebra. It's a very rich subject,
and I think a lot of what we're going to say also
impacts primary school education and high school
education too. As you will see, we'll also have a
chance to see how to look at some very standard
things in a new light, perhaps a better light.
So let's start by positioning this subject roughly
in terms of arithmetic and geometry. I think of
algebra as forming a bridge between arithmetic
and geometry. It emanates from arithmetic and ties
these two fundamental disciplines together. If I
had to say what algebra was in a single sentence,
perhaps simplified, I would say something like
algebra is generalized arithmetic. We take the
arithmetic that we've been studying—just
arithmetic with natural numbers, integers,
fractions, rational numbers, the basic
arithmetic involving the operations of
addition, multiplication, subtraction,
and division—and then we look to extend
those operations and those numbers.
We're going to enlarge our idea of
objects that we can do arithmetic with, and
that's basically how algebra comes about.
Historically, its origins probably go back to the
Babylonians, but the Greeks already had a pretty
good idea of algebra in a geometrical context. As
I've already discussed in the talks about Greek
geometry, Euclid had a kind of geometrical
algebra where algebraic expressions were
interpreted and proven geometrically. Somewhat
later, Nicomachus wrote an influential book
called "Introductio Arithmetica," in which
he emphasized the importance of arithmetic
essentially aside from geometry, not necessarily
built up from geometry. The greatest arithmetician
of the Greek times was Diophantus, who lived
250 years after Christ and whose name gives
us the subject of Diophantine equations, which
are equations where we're looking for solutions
purely in terms of integers or sometimes
rational numbers. He wrote a book called
"Arithmetica," actually 13 books together—I think
some of them have been lost—but nevertheless he
gives us a very thorough treatment of a lot of
different problems, somewhat unrelated perhaps,
and not a lot of systematic theory, but he's able
to solve a lot of interesting problems, such as
this one here: find three numbers such that their
sum and the sum of any two of them is a square.
But algebra as a separate discipline
from arithmetic really only gets going
with the Hindus and then later the Arabs.
So let's have a look at that development.
Earlier in this series, we've already remarked
that Hindu mathematics was notable for their
introduction of essentially our numerical system.
The decimal number system that we use to represent
numbers is basically a gift to us from the Hindu
mathematicians and a crucially important one. So
given their very strong foundation arithmetically,
it's no surprise that they were able to solve a
lot of reasonably sophisticated algebraic
problems. Some names that are notable are
Aryabhata, who lived around 400 AD, Brahmagupta
around 600 AD, and Bhaskara in the 12th century.
Aspects of this Hindu arithmetic algebra
include, first of all, a richer numerical
system which was quite comfortable with
working with fractional, negative numbers,
and also irrational numbers like square roots
of natural numbers—square root of 3, square root
of 5, and so on. They were very familiar with
quadratic equations and how to solve a quadratic
equation and more sophisticated things too. A very
important number theoretical Diophantine equation,
called Pell's equation nowadays, which
goes back much earlier to even Archimedes,
is x^2 - 61y^2 = 1. If you try to solve that
equation for integers x and y, then aside
from the sort of trivial solution 1, you'll be
challenged to find a solution if you don't know
some of the theory that the Hindu mathematicians
and subsequent generations discovered.
After the Hindus, the torch passed to the Arab
mathematicians, who took the Hindu works, took the
Greek works, studied them both, put them together,
and developed them further. The name of algebra,
in fact, comes from the work of Muhammad ibn
Musa al-Khwarizmi (not sure if I'm pronouncing
that right) around 800 AD, who wrote a book called
in Arabic "Al-Kitab al-Mukhtasar fi Hisab al-Jabr
wal-Muqabala," which roughly means "The
Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion
and Balancing." The kinds of things that he was
referring to with "completion" is this process:
say you have an equation x^2 - 3 = 13, where
x is an unknown number that you're trying to
determine. Then what you can do is you can
take the -3 away from the left-hand side
and you can restore it by essentially taking
it away from the right-hand side or adding
it to the right-hand side. This is a very
typical kind of basic operation in algebra.
Other mathematicians, like Omar Khayyam
around 1100, who was notable for being
a literary great as well (he wrote
the Rubaiyat), were very interested
in cubic equations and showed how to solve
certain cubic equations using conic sections.
Alright, so with that very brief historical
introduction, what happens in algebra? Well,
one of the key ideas certainly is that we're
going to use letters instead of numbers,
or letters together with numbers. This has
a lot of advantages and it allows general
laws to be more easily stated—something that
we've already done so far. It often clarifies
the essentials of a problem in that you get to
see the wood, not just the trees. It leads to
various higher arithmetics, especially
related to things called polynomials,
which are going to play an important role in
algebra. And it shows the connections between
different kinds of questions—that certain kinds
of questions are actually very much the same.
But a natural question that bedevils a
lot of first-time learners of algebra is:
what do these letters actually mean? What is
x? What is y? And that's something that we're
going to talk about. It turns out that it's
not so simple to say what those things are
because the nature of the x's and y's and z's
and so on that appear in algebra changes as you
become a little bit more sophisticated.
When you start off with the subject, x,
y, and z have a certain role and a certain
meaning, but later on, that meaning changes
in quite a different direction. And so there's
a subtle but important shift that we're going
to have to pay attention to because we're
interested in what's really going on and
being precise about the basic structures and
the basic objects that we're going to be using.
Okay, so we're going to roughly follow
a program like this: to start off with,
first we're going to talk about
what we might call Baby Algebra,
which is more or less arithmetic with letters.
Then we're going to move on to polynomials,
and I'm going to introduce things called poly
numbers, which are very closely related to
polynomials but have some interesting advantages.
We're going to talk about rational functions,
which are a very important field of doing
arithmetic, and we're going to talk about
matrices, which is another extension of
arithmetic. And of course, algebra has
much more in it, but probably this will be good
for a first stab at what the subject is about.
So next time we are going
to start with Baby Algebra,
the algebra that students
learn when they're 10, 11,
12 years old. I hope you'll join me for that.
I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
[Music]